add hip-0019 (#353)
helm/community: hips/hip-0019.md

---
hip: 0019
title: "Add Exclude File Option to Helm Lint Command"
authors: Danilo Patrucco, Daniel Pritchett
created: "2024-07-03"
type: "feature"
status: "draft"
---

## Abstract 

> This proposal suggests enhancing the `helm lint` command to exclude specific files or patterns from linting through a `.helmlintignore` file, similar to `.gitignore` or `.helmignore`. Additionally, a `--lint-ignore-file` flag will be introduced to specify alternative locations for the `.helmlintignore` file, facilitating its use in projects with multiple sub-charts. 

Author: HELM_LINT_CONFIG_FILE added to document

> This proposal suggests enhancing the `helm lint` command to exclude specific files or patterns from linting through a `.helmlintignore` file, similar to `.gitignore` or `.helmignore`. Additionally, a `--lint-ignore-file` flag will be introduced to specify alternative locations for the `.helmlintignore` file, facilitating its use in projects with multiple sub-charts. 

Author: renamed the file to .helmconfigfile.yaml

## Motivation 
In large Helm charts, certain files or configurations may deviate from standard linting rules but are accepted by the maintainers. Currently, `helm lint` evaluates all files within a chart, leading to irrelevant warnings or errors. An exclusion option and the ability to specify ignore file locations would allow developers to better manage lint results. 
## Rationale 
This proposal aims to give developers and integrators greater control over the linting process by allowing exclusions for: 
- Files imported or managed by third parties that are not directly editable. 
- Files that may not conform to static linting rules. 
- Files containing intentional deviations from standard practices due to specific deployment scenarios. 
The `.helmlintignore` file will support simple patterns to match files and directories for easy exclusion management. The `--lint-ignore-file` flag enhances this by allowing centralized management of lint exclusions in complex projects. 

> ## Specification 

Reviewer: Also: The lint rules/config should be packaged with the Chart. As `helm lint` (and `helm lint --with-subcharts`) will want to be able to include the config when linting charts pull from chart repositories/registries.

ie. we want this to work:
```
helm pull <url> 
helm lint <chart>.tgz
```

Without packaging the lint config with the chart, it would only be possible to have the config apply when checking the chart out from source (ie. git repo)

And this will certainly prevent lint config from being utilized when linting subcharts (the `--with-subcharts` above)

Author: currently the --with-subchart command seems to be broken when a chart is packaged, see discussion in helm-dev slack:

[helm-dev slack discussion](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C51E88VDG/p1726696306443959)

Author: also, we verified the the `.helmlintconfig.yaml` file would be packaged with the chart

### `.helmlintignore` File Format 

> The `.helmlintignore` file allows chart developers to specify filenames or glob patterns to exclude from linting. The format is straightforward, with one pattern per line, similar to `.gitignore` files. 

Reviewer: I think a yaml format that can encode different types of rules/options for linting would be much more preferable than a custom / one-file-per-line format (that is limited to just that).

I also think that all/nothing for lint ignoring (per-file) is too course for the general case. Especially since many lint rules pertain (in Helm) to e.g. `Chart.yaml` ([ref](https://github.com/helm/helm/blob/main/pkg/lint/rules/chartfile.go#L36)). Likely it normally would be better to exclude certain rules for Chart specific files (`Chart.yaml`, `values.yaml` (default values), etc), and paths for templates, etc. See https://github.com/helm/helm/tree/main/pkg/lint/rules for current Helm linting rules.
 
Also take e.g. https://yamllint.readthedocs.io/en/stable/configuration.html#configuration or https://ansible.readthedocs.io/projects/lint/configuring/#ansible-lint-configuration as inspirations/examples for what might go into a lint configuration (of course not every there will apply to Helm).

Author: [@GeorgeJ](https://kubernetes.slack.com/team/U01SGB8GQQ7)
 I have a question about this comment:
I also think that all/nothing for lint ignoring (per-file) is too course for the general case. Especially since many lint rules pertain (in Helm) to e.g. Chart.yaml (ref). Likely it normally would be better to exclude certain rules for Chart specific files (Chart.yaml, values.yaml (default values), etc), and paths for templates, etc. See https://github.com/helm/helm/tree/main/pkg/lint/rules for current Helm linting rules.
In response this discussion about the broad approach to lint ignoring, especially for key Helm config files like Chart.yaml, I want to discuss the current errors handling from the PR that we submitted. Right now we remove errors rather than skipping them altogether
Here’s the gist:
Error removal: We let all errors get logged as usual but we remove them from the final error list that users see. This keeps the linting thorough but the user interface clean.
Debugging Option: If someone needs to dive deep or is troubleshooting, they can use the --debug flag to see everything, removed errors included.
Post-Processing Advantages: Handling the error list after it’s fully formed means we clean things up at the end. This makes managing exceptions way easier and ensures we’re not tossing useful feedback too early.
I see a few pluses here:
Flexible Error Reports: You get a neat, easy-to-digest error report by default but can switch to a detailed view when needed.
Better Troubleshooting: Keeping all the linting info till the end helps us understand what we're filtering out and why, making it easier to adjust if something's not quite right.
What you are suggesting would be more aligned with something like this :we would need to change the structure of the lintError variable to something like this:
type LintError struct {
 // Err is the original linter error
 Err error
 // ChartPath is the string path to the chart that generated this linter error
 ChartPath  string
 // TemplatePath is nullable because some errors are chart-level while others are template-specific
 TemplatePath *string
}
In this way we would be able to better review and analyze the errors and even list them in the output, giving an idea of how many errors are ignored, but that would require a pretty important lift, because it would change multiple files/potentially structures/functions

Author: Reply from @gjenkins8 

Morning, I don't disagree with the above (the "post-filtering" approach). I took a look at the reworked HIP, it looks good to me! Thanks for the updates
If the idea of specific rule based exclusions is too much for the moment, I think fine to pivot and just support what you have described (the fileMask and errorMask "directives")
I would suggest to small updates the HIP with some scope details:
only file / error based exclusions (masks) considered
rule-based exclusions (& configuration) considered difficult to implement, and skipped for the moment
My major/main goal was to make sure e.g. like yaml lint that the lint configuration can be extended in the future. I think it can with the current format (but I will put some comments on the format on the HIP)

### Command Behavior 
When `helm lint` is executed, it will first check for the presence of a `.helmlintignore` file in the chart directory or at a specified location using the `--lint-ignore-file` flag. This allows the command to parse the file and exclude any files or directories matching the patterns. Additionally, if a file contains a specific error line that matches a pattern, that error will not be displayed. 
## Backwards Compatibility 
This proposal introduces no breaking changes. Charts without a `.helmlintignore` file or without using the `--lint-ignore-file` flag will function as they currently do. 
## Security Implications 
No significant security implications are expected. The `.helmlintignore` file is processed locally by `helm lint` without modifying chart content or involving network activity. 
## How to Teach This 
Documentation for the `.helmlintignore` file and the `--lint-ignore-file` flag will be included in the official Helm docs under the `helm lint` section. Examples and common patterns will be provided to aid new users. 
## Reference Implementation 

> No reference implementation yet. Post-acceptance, an issue will be created in the Helm community GitHub repository to add the HIP 

Reviewer: https://github.com/helm/helm/pull/13257 has been started :)

## Motivation
In large Helm charts, certain files or configurations may not conform to standard linting rules but are accepted by the maintainers. The current `helm lint` process evaluates all files within a chart, often leading to irrelevant warnings or errors. An option to exclude specific files and the ability to specify config file locations would streamline the linting process.

## Rationale
The aim of this proposal is to grant developers and integrators more control over the linting process by enabling:
- Exclusions for files imported or managed by third parties that are not directly editable.
- Exclusions for files that may not adhere to static linting rules.
- Exclusions for files containing intentional deviations from standard practices due to specific deployment scenarios.

The `.helmlintconfig.yaml` file will support simple patterns for matching files and directories, enhancing ease of management. The `--lint-config-file` flag will facilitate centralized management of lint exclusions in complex projects.

## Specification
### `.helmlintconfig.yaml` File Format

> The `.helmlintconfig.yaml` file enables chart developers to specify filenames or glob patterns to exclude from linting. The format is YAML, with patterns specified under a `lintIgnore` key, making future extensions for additional configurations feasible.

Reviewer: glob patterns for both file paths and error strings

Author: done !

#### Example
```
# .helmlintconfig.yaml file example

> lintIgnore:

Reviewer: perhaps a format more like (bikeshedding hard here):

```
# .helmlintconfig.yaml file example
pathIgnore:
- "migrations/templates/job.yaml"
- "gitlab/templates/shared-secrets/self-signed-cert-job.yml"
- "gitlab/templates/*.yaml"
errorIgnore:
- "chart metadata is missing these dependencies*"
- "<include 'fullname' .>"
```

Author: I modified this section a little, but kept it similar to our suggestion because an error (the same error specifically) can occur in multiple charts / sub-charts, and connecting it to a file path would be beneficial.

## Backwards Compatibility
This proposal introduces no breaking changes. Charts without a `.helmlintconfig.yaml` file or those not using the `--lint-config-file` flag will function as before.

## Security Implications
No significant security implications are expected as the `.helmlintconfig.yaml` file is processed locally by `helm lint`, without modifying chart content or involving network activity.

## How to Teach This
Documentation for the `.helmlintconfig.yaml` file and the `--lint-config-file` flag will be integrated into the official Helm documentation under the `helm lint` section. Detailed examples and common patterns will be provided to assist new users.

## Reference Implementation
PR #[13257](https://github.com/helm/helm/pull/13257) created in the Helm/helm repository in gitlab 

## Open Issues
- Developing an effective and user-friendly pattern syntax for the `.helmlintconfig.yaml` file.
- Considering the potential for in-file annotations to temporarily exclude specific chart sections from linting.

> ## Rejected Ideas

Reviewer: Providing rule specific excludes and configurations, and composing configuration from "default" configuration e.g. similar to https://yamllint.readthedocs.io/en/stable/configuration.html#extending-the-default-configuration

Helm today doesn't "name" its lint rules, and changing the code/structure to support the above can be extended later

Author: Done, let me know if it's ok

Reviewer: oops, sorry, I mean we should add these to the "rejected ideas":
- Providing rule specific excludes (Helm today doesn't "name" its lint rules)
- composing configuration from "default" configuration (e.g. similar to https://yamllint.readthedocs.io/en/stable/configuration.html#extending-the-default-configuration)

--- 
hip: 0019
title: "Add Exclude File Option to Helm Lint Command"
authors: Danilo Patrucco
created: "2024-07-03"
type: "feature"
status: "draft"
---

## Abstract

> This proposal introduces enhancements to the `helm lint` command, allowing the exclusion of specific files or patterns through a `.helmlintconfig.yaml` file, analogous to `.gitignore` or `.helmignore`. Additionally, a `--lint-config-file` flag will be added to specify alternative locations for the `.helmlintconfig.yaml` file. This feature is particularly useful in projects with multiple sub-charts. An environment variable `HELM_LINT_CONFIG_FILE` will also be introduced to mirror the functionality of the flag.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This proposal introduces enhancements to the `helm lint` command, allowing the exclusion of specific files or patterns through a `.helmlintignore` file, analogous to `.gitignore` or `.helmignore`. Additionally, a `--lint-config-file` flag will be added to specify alternative locations for the `.helmlintignore` file. This feature is particularly useful in projects with multiple sub-charts. An environment variable `HELM_LINT_IGNORE_FILE` will also be introduced to mirror the functionality of the flag.
```

Author: Also, We did put the PR back in Draft, since we are waiting to have a finalized version of the HIP to continue the development work on the helm repo.  Please let me know If you have any additional reservation, and thank you for the review

> This proposal introduces enhancements to the `helm lint` command, allowing the exclusion of specific files or patterns through a `.helmlintconfig.yaml` file, analogous to `.gitignore` or `.helmignore`. Additionally, a `--lint-config-file` flag will be added to specify alternative locations for the `.helmlintconfig.yaml` file. This feature is particularly useful in projects with multiple sub-charts. An environment variable `HELM_LINT_CONFIG_FILE` will also be introduced to mirror the functionality of the flag.

Author: done

## Motivation

> In large Helm charts, certain files or configurations may not conform to standard linting rules but are accepted by the maintainers. The current `helm lint` process evaluates all files within a chart, often leading to irrelevant warnings or errors. An option to exclude specific files and the ability to specify config file locations would streamline the linting process.

Author: done

    errorIgnore: "<include 'fullname' .>"                                             # Ignores this specific error but not other errors in the file
```

### Command Behavior
When `helm lint` is executed, it checks for the presence of a `.helmlintconfig.yaml` file in the chart directory or at a location specified by the `--lint-config-file` flag. The command then parses this file to exclude any files or directories matching the patterns specified, including specific error lines.

## Backwards Compatibility
This proposal introduces no breaking changes. Charts without a `.helmlintconfig.yaml` file or those not using the `--lint-config-file` flag will function as before.

## Security Implications
No significant security implications are expected as the `.helmlintconfig.yaml` file is processed locally by `helm lint`, without modifying chart content or involving network activity.

## How to Teach This
Documentation for the `.helmlintconfig.yaml` file and the `--lint-config-file` flag will be integrated into the official Helm documentation under the `helm lint` section. Detailed examples and common patterns will be provided to assist new users.

## Reference Implementation

> PR #[13257](https://github.com/helm/helm/pull/13257) created in the Helm/helm repository in gitlab 

Reviewer 3: n.b. this PR will need some significant changes to catch up with the current design as described here in HIP-0019

Author: this i will leave untouched if it's ok with you, since we put the PR in draft

## Open Issues

> - Developing an Effective and User-Friendly Pattern Syntax: We are considering the design of a flexible and intuitive pattern syntax for the `.helmlintconfig.yaml` file. This syntax would ideally support rule-specific configurations and exclusions, allowing users to finely control lint behaviors on a per-rule basis.

Reviewer 3: this piece is not self-evident to me, can we add a hypothetical such as "`errorCode: H019` would allow for across-the board suppression of errors by error code. We are deferring this for now because it will require a refactor of all 50+ existing helm lint cases."

Author: done

- In-File Annotations for Excluding Chart Sections: Exploring the possibility of in-file annotations that would let developers temporarily exclude specific sections of a chart from linting. This feature would provide granular control directly within Helm chart files.

> - Rule Naming and Configurations: Currently, Helm does not support named lint rules. Introducing named rules is a foundational step that would enable us to implement more sophisticated configuration features, such as rule-specific exclusions and settings. This would also allow users to extend or override a "default" configuration set, similar to practices seen in tools like [yamllint](https://yamllint.readthedocs.io/en/stable/configuration.html#extending-the-default-configuration). Naming rules would facilitate clearer and more maintainable configurations, laying the groundwork for future enhancements.

Reviewer 3: Looks like bullet points 1 and 3 here might be overlapping, maybe we could consolidate?

> - Future Enhancements and Extensibility: The proposed changes to the Helm linting system will likely require significant modifications to the existing codebase. As such, these enhancements could be implemented in phases, starting with foundational features like rule naming and extending to more complex configurations. This phased approach will help ensure stability and usability while expanding the linting capabilities of Helm.

Author: done
